when and where was william shakespeare born?

though no birth records exist, church records indicate that a william shakespeare was baptized at holy trinity church in stratford-upon-avon on april 26, 1564. from this, it is believed he was born on or near april 23, 1564, and this is the date scholars acknowledge as william shakespeare's birthday. located 103 miles west of london, during shakespeare's time stratford-upon-avon was a market town bisected with a country road and the river avon.
family

william was the third child of john shakespeare, a leather merchant, and mary arden, a local landed heiress. william had two older sisters, joan and judith, and three younger brothers, gilbert, richard and edmund. before william's birth, his father became a successful merchant and held official positions as alderman and bailiff, an office resembling a mayor. however, records indicate john's fortunes declined sometime in the late 1570s.
childhood and education

scant records exist of william's childhood, and virtually none regarding his education. scholars have surmised that he most likely attended the king's new school, in stratford, which taught reading, writing and the classics. being a public official's child, william would have undoubtedly qualified for free tuition. but this uncertainty regarding his education has led some to raise questions about the authorship of his work and even about whether or not william shakespeare ever existed.
william shakespeare’s wife and kids

william shakespeare married anne hathaway on november 28, 1582, in worcester, in canterbury province. hathaway was from shottery, a small village a mile west of stratford. william was 18 and anne was 26, and, as it turns out, pregnant. their first child, a daughter they named susanna, was born on may 26, 1583. two years later, on february 2, 1585, twins hamnet and judith were born. hamnet later died of unknown causes at age 11.
shakespeare’s lost years

there are seven years of william shakespeare's life where no records exist after the birth of his twins in 1585. scholars call this period the "lost years," and there is wide speculation on what he was doing during this period. one theory is that he might have gone into hiding for poaching game from the local landlord, sir thomas lucy. another possibility is that he might have been working as an assistant schoolmaster in lancashire. it is generally believed he arrived in london in the mid- to late 1580s and may have found work as a horse attendant at some of london's finer theaters, a scenario updated centuries later by the countless aspiring actors and playwrights in hollywood and broadway.
lord chamberlain's men

by the early 1590s, documents show william shakespeare was a managing partner in the lord chamberlain's men, an acting company in london with which he was connected for most of his career. considered the most important troupe of its time, the company changed its name to the king's men following the crowning of king james i, in 1603.

from all accounts, the king's men company was very popular. records show that shakespeare had works published and sold as popular literature. although the theater culture in 16th century england was not highly admired by people of high rank, many of the nobility were good patrons of the performing arts and friends of the actors.
william shakespeare the actor and playwright

by 1592, there is evidence william shakespeare earned a living as an actor and a playwright in london and possibly had several plays produced. the september 20, 1592 edition of the stationers' register (a guild publication) includes an article by london playwright robert greene that takes a few jabs at william shakespeare: "...there is an upstart crow, beautified with our feathers, that with his tiger's heart wrapped in a player's hide, supposes he is as well able to bombast out a blank verse as the best of you: and being an absolute johannes factotum, is in his own conceit the only shake-scene in a country," greene wrote of shakespeare.

scholars differ on the interpretation of this criticism, but most agree that it was greene's way of saying shakespeare was reaching above his rank, trying to match better known and educated playwrights like christopher marlowe, thomas nashe or greene himself.

early in his career, shakespeare was able to attract the attention of henry wriothesley, the earl of southampton, to whom he dedicated his first- and second-published poems: "venus and adonis" (1593) and "the rape of lucrece" (1594).

by 1597, shakespeare had already written and published 15 of his 37 plays. civil records show that at this time he purchased the second largest house in stratford, called new house, for his family. it was a four-day ride by horse from stratford to london, so it is believed that shakespeare spent most of his time in the city writing and acting and came home once a year during the 40-day lenten period, when the theaters were closed.
shakespeare’s globe theater

by 1599, william shakespeare and his business partners built their own theater on the south bank of the thames river, which they called the globe. in 1605, shakespeare purchased leases of real estate near stratford for 440 pounds, which doubled in value and earned him 60 pounds a year. this made him an entrepreneur as well as an artist, and scholars believe these investments gave him the time to write his plays uninterrupted.